*Presented as the introduction to the Mana Mahi panel at the TEU AI Conference 2025.*

Kia ora koutou, My name's Java. I'm a PhD student at the University of Auckland, and I research the future of universities, which is why I volunteer for all these types of things. 

I'm a bit of a student activist and a technology nerd. So that places me in an interesting intersection between loving technology and all this AI stuff that's going on, but also being very critical about it. 

I hope to kickstart your day in the direction of critical thinking and towards an agenda for unionists, leaders, policy makers and the like to protect and strengthen our dignity in the face of AI but to start us off I want to frame our conversation around the central question 'how do we ensure that ai tools enhance rather than erode the dignity of our work?' 

A key part of addressing this question is demystifying exactly what is happening, because there's so much and it's all moving so fast that it can be quite overwhelming. It's all imbued with and riddled with ethical concerns, reliability issues, this giant economic bubble, but also with genuinely interesting use cases. So that can make it feel quite overwhelming. It can sometimes be tempting to shut down in the face of it, to feel unqualified, or resigned to this unpredictable future. So I want to stop this attitude in its tracks through the recognition of the human agency amongst it all. So let us recognize artificial intelligence, development, adoption, and its implications for us as workers, as laborers, as a matter of social choice. 

I'm going to begin by getting us into a bit of a critical and perhaps even hopeful headspace. Technology as we think of it today–computers, the internet, social media–has some pretty radical traditions amongst it, but it also has some pretty terrible people who try to co-opt it, not because they love the technology, but because they love capitalism and they love flying any flag that will work to advance their wealth.
[I actually would like to review this comment and believe that there is a genuine interest in technology that a lot of these tech-bros have and that this can be part of them getting caught up quite unthoughtfully in its use but nonetheless is tied to their positionality within capitalism as capitalists.]

To demonstrate the other side of the coin, the positive side of the coin that we don't get to see so much, I want to point out some of my tech heroes like Aaron Schwartz, Cory Doctorow, Alexandria Elbeckian. These people have fought to free knowledge that we have all collectively created with the wealth that society shares in common and remove the gates that keep it for private profiteering. These actions have largely been to the beneficiary of the poor, the broke, the marginalized, and the global south. Others in the space have been continual advocates for open source, copy left, remix cultures that put not only knowledge but culture in the public domain. These people and countless like them have demonstrated that we are not homoeconomicus, optimizing, rational, economic decision makers that evaluate everything against some kind of arbitrary utility measure. But that in fact, core functionality of things like the software we're using to run the internet is based on open source work that has been developed within and to the benefit of the community–for the people, by the people. Although, this work is often then repackaged by service and product providers such as Zoom and Apple, right, and then resold. So, like, just a reminder to everyone here that while currently, in the words of Anne Pasek, 'AI is trash', it doesn't have to be. Maybe I'm naively hopeful, but this is just another information technology, and while our last information technology revolution did some kind of crazy damage, social media and extreame polarization for example. It also allowed some insanely cool stuff to happen, too, like this conference. This ultimately demonstrates that humans are at the wheel, just at a new wheel of a more powerful and unfamiliar tool that we're getting used to, and we gave the driver's sean to some of the least thoughtful, sometimes actively evil people. So this AI moment that we're in, I hope it can act as another reminder of the distribution of power, that our world is shaped by a system which is built to prioritize wealth over worth, and that we need to be critical and resistant to any system and any person that tries to confiscate our control over our livelihoods and that of our fellow comrades. 

The truth is our institutions are not under threat from AI they're under a continued attack by ideologues who are seeing education as nothing more than workplace training, who discount the work of our students, our administrators, educators, and researchers. These are people that are seeing our labor, our values, and our power as an obstacle to the continued consolidation and confiscation of wealth and AI has been this disruptive force that they've been able to latch on to in order to facilitate and obfuscate that process. It is not an innate feature of AI that it must be used in this way. A problem with this process of trying to instill AI everywhere is the contradiction it produces, violating the promise we were told by the system that was instilled to justify the system–the promise of capitalism lifting up all boats, of the university and higher education system liberating people via an education and producing a critical and civically informed population is now all evidently on display as at least partial truth at best. This evident failure puts the system into an identity crisis as students submitting work written by machines and teachers being told that we have to kind of assume that they will or maybe even ought to submit ChatGPT generated assignments.

So these false stories of our institutions and our economic systems that have been used to create the social license to continue operating while whittling away university courses of critical thinking and social sciences for example, while doing nothing while doing nothing to prevent wealth consolidation into the hands of the richest, are in this moment exposed as the falsehoods they are as AI usage exposes how students will prioritize easy grades over an education and universities will prioritize cost savings over good pedagogy. The system is losing its social license and the cracks are showing and we mustn't let this kind of opportunity go to waste! We can use this exposure to not just demand that AI tools are used in the best way possible but that the system overall must be better–must do what it promises for people the people it's meant to serve!

Just before I hand over this kororo I'll just leave you with a quick quote of the late David Graeber, which is that "the ultimate hidden truth of the world is that it is something we make and we could just as easily make differently." 